A Tribe Called Quest was a hip hop trio formed in 1985, consisting of MCs Q-Tip and Phife Dawg and DJ/Producer Ali Shaheed Muhammad. Their most successful album was 1991's The Low End Theory, although 1993's Midnight Marauders was also tremendously successful. Their innovative sampling, layering, and structuring of jazz records led many critics to label their style as jazz rap; a term which the members disapproved of.

The Notorious B.I.G., aka Christopher Wallace, was a Brooklyn-born rapper and crack dealer. When Wallace released his debut album with the 1994 record Ready to Die, he was a central figure in the East Coast hip hop scene and increased New York's visibility at a time when hip hop was mostly dominated by West Coast artists. On March 9, 1997, Wallace was killed by an unknown assailant in a drive-by shooting in Los Angeles, days before the release of his double album Life after Death. MTV ranked him at #3 on their list of The Greatest MCs of All Time.

The Fugees were a hip hop group that rose to fame in the mid-1990s, whose repertoire included elements of Hip hop, soul and Caribbean music, particularly reggae. The members of the group were rapper/singer/producer Wyclef Jean, rapper/singer/producer Lauryn Hill, and rapper Pras Michel. The group recorded two albums — one of which, The Score (1996), was a multi-platinum and Grammy-winning success — before disbanding in 1997.

Lauryn Hill and Wyclef Jean each went on to successful solo recording careers; Pras focused on soundtrack recordings and acting, though he found commercial success with his song "Ghetto Supastar", featuring Maya and the Old Dirty Bastard. In 2007, MTV ranked them the 9th greatest Hip-hop group of all time.

After a tremendously successful career with the hip hop supergroup NWA in the late 80s and early 90s, Dr. Dre (real name Andre Romelle Young) teamed up with Snoop Doggy Dogg, real name Calvin Broadus, to produce the seminal west-coast hip-hop albums The Chronic and Doggystyle. Broadus was charged with murder in 1994, and short film about Snoop Dogg's murder trial called Murder Was The Case was released along with an accompanying soundtrack. However, by the time Snoop Dogg's second album, Tha Doggfather, was released in 1996, the price of living (or sometimes just imitating) the "gangsta" life had become very evident, with the death of friend and labelmate 2Pac and the racketeering indictment of Death Row co-founder Suge Knight.

Naughty by Nature is a Grammy Award-winning American hip hop group that consists of rappers Treach and Vin Rock, and the DJ Kay Gee. The group first appeared on the music scene in 1989 releasing an album called Independent Leaders under their then name the New Style. The album generated the minor hit "Scuffin' Those Knees". After the release of their first album, the group was mentored by fellow New Jersey native Queen Latifah, and subsequently changed its name.